
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Ohio Naturalist, Vol. II, No. 1,
November, 1901

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms 
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online 
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, 
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located 
before using this eBook.


Title: The Ohio Naturalist, Vol. II, No. 1, November, 1901

Author: Various

Release Date: August 28, 2023 [eBook #71507]

Language: English

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
         at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
         generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OHIO NATURALIST, VOL. II,
NO. 1, NOVEMBER, 1901 ***





                                  THE
                            Ohio Naturalist

 Volume II.                 =NOVEMBER, 1901.=    Annual Subscription, 50
                                                 cts.
 Number 1.                                       Single Number, 10 cts.


                 “The Best of Everything Laboratorial.”

                 For every division of Natural Science.

                      Microscopes and Accessories.
                      Slides and Cover Glasses.
                      Pocket Magnifiers.
                      Field Glasses.
                      Dissecting Instruments.
                      Insect Pins.
                      Glassware,
                      Chemicals,
                      Etc., Etc.


                  General Apparatus & Chemical Company

                   Cleveland, Ohio, 262 Prospect St.

                        Branch: Berlin, Germany.

 Entered at the Post Office at Columbus, Ohio, as second class matter.




                             ....LEARN....

                 Bookkeeping, Shorthand and Typewriting

                                 at the

[Sidenote: Y. M. C. A. Bldg.
           Columbus, Ohio]

Ohio Business Institute....

[Illustration: Stationary]

Bookkeeping taught here as books are kept. All entries made from
vouchers, bills, notes checks, drafts, etc. The student learns by doing.
Thorough, interesting and practical.

                  *       *       *       *       *

We are pioneer teachers of =Gregg’s Light-Line Shorthand=, a simple,
sensible, legible, rapid system. Learned in half the time required by
other systems. Send postal for first lesson.

[Illustration: A Lesson in Gregg]

If you are at present employed, write us regarding our Home Study work.

Same thorough instruction as given in the class-room.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Circulars and Booklets free to those desiring particulars concerning an
up-to-date School of Business.

             ROWLAND & ROGERS, Proprs.,       Columbus, O.


                        OHIO MEDICAL UNIVERSITY.

                             DEPARTMENTS OF

                   MEDICINE, DENTISTRY AND PHARMACY.

  Four years graded course in Medicine, three in Dentistry, and two in
                Pharmacy. Annual Sessions, seven months.

       All Instruction, except Clinical, by the Recitation Plan.

Students graded on their daily recitations and term examinations. Large
class rooms designed for the recitation system. Laboratories are large,
well lighted and equipped with modern apparatus. Abundant clinical
facilities in both Medical and Dental Departments. =CONSIDERING SUPERIOR
ADVANTAGES FEES ARE LOW.=

             For Catalogue and Other Information, Address:

    GEORGE M. WATERS, A. M., M. D., Dean, Medical Department.
        L. P. BETHEL, D. D. S., Dean, Dental Department.
            GEO. H. MATSON, JR., G. PH., Dean, Pharmacy Department.

                        OHIO MEDICAL UNIVERSITY,
            700–716 North Park Street,      COLUMBUS, OHIO.


                      _Starling Medical College_,

                     Corner State and 6th Streets,
                     COLUMBUS, OHIO. ❧ ❧

                  _MEDICAL AND SURGICAL CLINICS AT
                  FOUR WELL EQUIPPED HOSPITALS._ ❧ ❧ ❧
                  ❧

              WELL EQUIPPED AND THOROUGH IN EVERY DETAIL.

                    EXCEPTIONAL CLINICAL ADVANTAGES.


  CURTIS C. HOWARD, M. Sc., Registrar. STARLING LOVING, M. D., LL. D.,
                                 Dean.


                       _The_ “Ohio Naturali_s_t.”

A journal devoted more especially to the natural history of Ohio. The
official organ of THE BIOLOGICAL CLUB OF THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY.
Published monthly during the academic year, from November to June (8
numbers). Price 50 cents per year, payable in advance. To foreign
countries, 75 cents. Single copies, 10 cents.

                 _Editor-in-Chief_,      JAMES S. HINE.

                           _Associate Editors._

                       J. A. BOWNOCKER, Geology,
                       J. H. SCHAFFNER, Botany,
                       F. L. LANDACRE, Zoology,
                       W. C. MILLS, Archaeology,
                       MAX MORSE, Ornithology,
                       F. J. TYLER, Ecology.


                           _Advisory Board._

                       Prof. W. A. KELLERMAN.
                       Prof. HERBERT OSBORN.
                       Prof. CHARLES S. PROSSER.

              Address THE OHIO NATURALIST,
                                  Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.


               The Truth, The Whole Truth,
                               and Nothing but the Truth.

                 UNCONDITIONALLY THE BEST TYPEWRITER IS

                           THE CHICAGO $35.00

[Illustration: Logo]

No typewriter is worth $100. We have made a mechanically =excelling=
machine, and sell it for $35. We claim that it is =the superior= of any
typewriter made. This is a broad but carefully weighed statement, and it
is the =truth=.

Awarded gold medal at the Paris Exposition, 1900, in open competition
with all other makes of typewriters.

Our descriptive matter tells an interesting story. Send for it and learn
something about a high-grade typewriter sold at an honest price.

                      CHICAGO WRITING MACHINE CO.,
           89 Wendell Street,      ❧❧❧      CHICAGO, U. S. A.




                         _The Ohio Naturalist_,

                              PUBLISHED BY

          _The Biological Club of the Ohio State University_.

 ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
 Volume II.                  NOVEMBER, 1901.                      No. 1.
 ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS.


                                                                PAGE.
   Announcements                                                  131
   Geophilous Plants of Ohio—FREDERICK J. TYLER                   132
   Notes on Nesting of Warblers at Ft. Ancient, O.—RAY DENSMORE   134
   Ohio Fungi Exsiccati.—W. A. KELLERMAN                          135
   Helps in Entomological Study                                   140
   An Abnormal Salamander.—E. B. WILLIAMSON                       141
   The Summer’s Work at Sandusky                                  141
   The Maximum Height of Plants.—JOHN H. SCHAFFNER                142
   The Birds of Cedar Point, Sandusky.—R. L. BAIRD                143
   Meeting of the Biological Club                                 145




                             ANNOUNCEMENTS.


With this issue the OHIO NATURALIST begins its second volume. With
brighter prospects before us we shall endeavor to make improvements over
the first volume and to give our subscribers as good a publication as we
possibly can. The subscription price remains the same as last year and
we send out a large number of sample copies of this issue, with the
desire that when you receive your copy, if you are not already a
subscriber, you will conclude to become one and send us fifty cents and
order the current volume sent to your address. A number of complete sets
of Volume I., or any single number of that volume, are for sale at the
regular subscription price. Address the OHIO NATURALIST, Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It is suggested that we introduce a correspondence department into our
journal. To that end we announce that hereafter we shall be pleased to
publish letters, or parts of letters, from our correspondents, whenever
we consider such of sufficient general interest to our subscribers.
Also, whenever desired, questions of importance sent in by
correspondents will be answered in these columns. Members of the
Advisory Board have promised to take charge of this department of the
work.




                     GEOPHILOUS PLANTS OF OHIO, II.

                          FREDERICK J. TYLER.


The underground parts of plants are often of value as a means of
characterization, and if the plant is a weed they become of the greatest
importance; as the worst weeds are almost invariably geophytes. Very
little information is given in most of the manuals upon this subject,
and what is given is not always satisfactory.

[Illustration: _Figure 1._]

The terms used in describing geophytes are in every day use, except
one—the crown. This term is applied to an herbaceous perennial which has
but one upright stalk the first year. This dies to the surface of the
ground at the end of the season, but the short, upright, underground
stem survives. It then sends up lateral branches, which in some cases
grow out several feet, in others only an inch or so before coming to the
surface. This branching, however, usually takes place in the Autumn and
often the entire crown of lateral branches is formed some time before
the parent plant is cut down by frost.

The following notes, and others, to be given later, are intended to
supplement the notes on Geophilous Plants of Ohio in the _O. S. U.
Naturalist_, 1:21:

Hypericum ascyron L. A large woody root, surmounted by a close crown.

Gentiana andrewsii Griseb. An oblique rhizome, about 2 in. long, with
numerous fleshy roots showing root contraction.

Corallorhiza odontorhiza (Willd.) Nutt. A small bulb, sending out the
coralloid roots from the base.

Lespedeza frutescens (L.) Britton. A long woody tap root, surmounted by
a close crown.

Lespedeza procumbens Michx. A close crownformer.

Lespedeza violacea (L.) Pars. A long tap-root and close crown, sending
up from 10 to 20 annual shoots.

Lespedeza hirta (L.) Ell. A crownformer.

Meibomia pauciflora (Nutt.) Kuntze. A rhizomatous crownformer. The
rhizomes are slender, a foot or more in length, and branching. At the
point of emergence there is usually a cluster of annual stems.

Thalictrum purpurascens L. A crownformer.

Coreopsis tripteria L. Rhizome composed of annual segments which are
about 1 inch in length.

Epigaea repens L. Rhizomes long and slender, close to the surface of the
ground.

Cypripedium acaule Ait. Rhizome 2 or 3 in. long, sending out numerous
strong roots. The annual growth in length is very small. In one specimen
examined the growth of four years amounted to only 6 lines.

Waldsteinia fragarioides (Michx.) Tratt. Rhizome 4 to 12 in. long,
slender. Lateral branches numerous.

Plantago cordata Lam. An oblique rhizome of unique habit. The rhizomes
of large plants are ½ to ¾ in. thick, and are solid for 2 or 3 in., but
back of this the center rots away, leaving a shell which splits up to
the base. In small plants it splits but once, forming a flat or slightly
incurved ribbon. This becomes rounded, and seems to perform the function
of a root. It, however, dies off gradually at the posterior parts. In
fig. 1 the split portion is still united near the middle of one of the
specimens, and a portion of the posterior end is dead. The root-like
portion of the rhizome is much longer than the true rhizome.

Plantago rugellii Dec. A short, upright rhizome.

Plantago major L. A short, upright rhizome.

Lobelia syphilitica L. A close crownformer.

Geum canadense Jacq. A short, horizontal rhizome.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A specimen of the large Noctuid moth, Erebus odora Linn., was taken by
members of the class in geology who were out for a field excursion on
October 5th. So far as I am aware this is the first record for the
capture of this species in Central Ohio. The specimen was said to be in
excellent condition when taken, but was slightly rubbed and torn in
bringing it in.




                     NOTES ON NESTING OF WARBLERS.

                         At Fort Ancient, Ohio.

                             RAY DENSMORE.


During the latter part of May of the present year Mr. Tyler and myself
spent some time collecting in and around Fort Ancient, Warren County,
Ohio. The Fort is situated on the summit of a hill surrounded by gullies
200 to 300 feet deep, with rather steep sides. The Little Miami River
runs by on the west.

The sides of the gullies are springy and covered by enough bushes and
small trees to make it an ideal resort for many of the warblers. The
most common was the yellow-breasted chat. Nearly every clump of bushes
was inhabited by one or more pairs of these well named birds. Several
nests were found and two sets of four eggs each were taken. One set is
heavily marked with reddish blotches; the other is typical in
coloration, but one egg is nearly a runt. Oven birds were numerous, but
no nests were found. Kentucky warblers were abundant in the lower part
of the gullies. Three nests were found, one containing four eggs in an
advanced stage of incubation, one containing three fresh eggs and a cow
bird’s egg and one nest just completed. There was but little variation
in the material used in construction, appearance or location of the
nests. The foundations were composed of tightly packed leaves, the bases
of which were outward, and a lining of fine rootlets or in one a small
amount of horse hair.

A nest of the worm-eating warbler, containing six eggs, was found by Mr.
Tyler in a depression in the side of a bank under a bush. The bird sat
very close and allowed us to approach within three or four feet before
she would leave the nest. We were able to identify her very certainly.
The species must have been rare in the locality, for no other specimens
were seen during our trip. The nest was composed of a foundation of
leaves, loosely placed, and lined with fine rootlets and weed stems.

The Louisiana water thrush was abundant along the streams. One nest was
found containing four young birds about a week old. It had a foundation
of weed stems and twigs and was lined with rootlets. Its situation was
in the side of a bank a few feet above the water.

A Maryland yellow throat was heard on the flats of the Little Miami
River, and two other warblers were seen that I was unable to identify,
although one may have been the chestnut-sided.

                                               Perry, Lake County, Ohio.




                         OHIO FUNGI EXSICCATI.

                (With Reprint of Original Descriptions.)

                W. A. KELLERMAN, Ohio State University.


It is proposed to distribute exsiccata of the Ohio species of Fungi,
issuing small fascicles from time to time as material may be available.

The original descriptions of all the species, or that given in
connection with the first use of the binomial or technical designation,
will be printed on the labels in addition to the data usually given.
Complete synonomy will not be attempted.

The number of copies will be limited, but it is hoped that all
mycologists who might be especially interested in the specimens, and
those wishing to exchange, may be furnished with the fascicles as they
appear.

Fascicle 1, containing Nos. 1 to 16, issued November 20, 1901,
represents the following species:

   1. Aecidium impatientis Schw., on Impatiens biflora Walt.

   2. Aecidium porosum Peck, on Vicia americana Muhl.

   3. Aecidium sambuci Schw., on Sambucus canadensis L.

   4. Cintractia sorghi (Link), on cultivated Sorghum (S. vulgare Pers.)

   5. Cintractia sorghi (Link), obtained by inoculation.

   6. Cintractia sorghi (Link), on Broom Corn (S. vulgare Pers.)

   7. Cintractia sorghi (Link), obtained by inoculation.

   8. Peronospora arthuri Farl., on Onagra biennis (L.) Scop.

   9. Phyllosticta asiminae E. & K., on Asimina triloba (L.) Dun.

  10. Puccinia helianthi Schw., on Helianthus divaricatus L.

  11. Puccinia helianthi Schw., on Helianthus mollis Lam.

  12. Puccinia marie-wilsoni Clinton, on Claytonia virginica L.

  13. Puccinia podophylli Schw., on Podophyllum peltatum L.

  14. Puccinia smilacis Schw., on Smilax glauca Walt.

  15. Septoria podophyllina Peck, on Podophyllum peltatum L.

  16. Ustilago zeae (Beckm.) Ung., on Zea mays L.

Thanks are extended to the mycologists who have rendered advice and
assistance, especially to Messrs J. B. Ellis, J. C. Arthur, A. P.
Morgan, and C. G. Lloyd. Acknowledgment for assistance in collecting
will be found on the labels accompanying the several specimens.

The labels to the sixteen specimens of the first Fascicle are here
reproduced.


                     1. Aecidium impatientis Schw.

                       On Impatiens biflora Walt.
                   Columbus, Ohio.      June 1, 1901.
                         Coll. W. A. Kellerman.

“Aecidium impatientis Sz. V. effusum magnum expallescens, peridiis in
centro sparsis, crenatis, sporidiis majoribus luteo-fuscis simplicibus.

“Frequens Maio in foliis Impatientis maculatae. Folia bullata reddit, et
macula lata lutescente, in centro obscuriore inquinat.” L. de
Schweinitz, Synopsis Fungorum Carolinae Superioris (excerpta), p. 41.
No. 442. (1822).


                       2. Aecidium porosum Peck.

                        On Vicia americana Muhl.
              Lakeside, Ottawa Co., O.      May 17, 1901.
                         Coll. W. A. Kellerman.

“Aecidium porosum, Pk. Spots none; cups crowded, deep-seated, broad,
wide-mouthed, occupying the whole lower surface of the leaf to which
they give a porous appearance; spores orange-colored, subangular,
.0008–.001 inch in length.” Botanical Gazette, =3=:34. April, 1878.


                       3. Aecidium sambuci Schw.

                       On Sambucus canadensis L.
                  Columbus, Ohio.      June 24, 1901.
                         Coll. W. A. Kellerman.

“Aecidium sambuci Sz. V. maculaeforme magnum crassum folia contorquens
aurantium exalbicans, peridiis minutis, sporidiisque simplicibus
pallidis.

“In foliis inprimis ad venas majores et in petiolis Sambuci Canadensis.
Folia contorquet. Color aurantio-croceus; peridia sparsa pulvere
pallido, lutescente-albo.” L. de Schweinitz. Synopsis Fungorum Carolinae
Superioris (excerpta), p. 41. No. 441. (1822).

“Diagnosis ulterior sequens [sub nom. Caeoma, subgen. Aecidium,
sambuciatum]. C. maculis intumescentibus saepe maximis (i. e. 2
uncialibus) in petiolis, pallescentibus. Pseudoperidiis magnis,
crebris elevatis, aurantiacis aut pallidis, margine fusco.
Sporidiis aurantiofulvis, decolorantibus. In foliis omnia multo
minora—pseudoperidiis densim aggregatis.” L. de Schweinitz,
Synopsis Fungorum in America Boreali media degentium, p. 294. No.
2897. (1834).


                      4. Cintractia sorghi (Link)

          Sporisorium sorghi Link. Ustilago sorghi (Lk.) Pass.
             On cultivated Sorghum (Sorghum vulgare Pers.)
                Columbus, Ohio.      September 15, 1900.
                 Coll. F. J. Tyler and O. E. Jennings.

“Sporisorium sorghi. Sp. acervis ovalibus, sporidiis globosis nigris
germinum.

“Diagn. Substantia farinosa germinum Sorghi vulgaris primum rimis variis
separatur ita ut semina hient. Tum sporidia oriuntur, usque dum tota
compages interior germinis in sporidia dilapsa sit. Excrescunt quoque
glumae in apicibus ramulorum paniculae, sporidia et partes floris
mutilas continentes. Sub microscopio composito acervi compacti
conspiciuntur, aqua adfusa non diffluentes, e quibus flocci simplices
aut semel ramosi exeunt tenues septati, pauci tantum e singulo acervo.
Sporidia compressis acervis in conspectum prodeunt exacte globosa sat
magna, minora majoribus intermixta.” H. F. Link in Linné Species
Plantarum, =6=^2:86.


                      5. Cintractia sorghi (Link)

          Sporisorium sorghi Link. Ustilago sorghi (Lk.) Pass.
             On cultivated Sorghum (Sorghum vulgare Pers.)
                Columbus, Ohio.      November 10, 1900.
                         Coll. W. A. Kellerman.

                          Supplement to No. 4.

       Obtained by inoculating the Sorghum seed with smut spores.


                      6. Cintractia sorghi (Link)

          Sporisorium sorghi Link. Ustilago sorghi (Lk.) Pass.
            On cultivated Broom Corn (Sorghum vulgare Pers.)
                Columbus, Ohio.      November 21, 1901.
                         Coll. W. A. Kellerman.

                          Supplement to No. 4.


                      7. Cintractia sorghi (Link)

          Sporisorium sorghi Link. Ustilago sorghi (Lk.) Pass.
            On cultivated Broom Corn (Sorghum vulgare Pers.)
                Columbus, Ohio.      November 21, 1901.

                          Supplement to No. 4.

Obtained by inoculating the Broom Corn seed with the Sorghum smut.


                      8. Peronospora arthuri Farl.

                            Conidial stage.
                      On Onagra biennis (L.) Scop.
                   Columbus, Ohio.      June 5, 1901.
                         Coll. W. A. Kellerman.

“P. arthuri n. sp. Conidiophores rather short and rigid, several times
dichotomous. Tips rather short and rigid. Conidia broadly ellipsoidal,
obtuse, 22–26 mmm. by 19 mmm., slightly violet-colored. Oospores large,
dark brown, 34–42 mmm. in diameter, exospore covered with short, blunt
papillae.” W. G. Farlow, Botanical Gazette, =8=:315. October, 1883.


                    9. Phyllosticta asiminae E. & K.

                     On Asimina triloba (L.) Dunal.
         West Alexandria, Preble Co., Ohio.      July 4, 1901.
                         Coll. W. A. Kellerman.

“Phyllosticta asiminae E. & K. Spots pale brownish, of irregular shape
(½–1 cm.), bordered by a distinct, dark raised line; perithecia
subglobose, deeply immersed, their apices barely visible on the upper
surface of the leaf, scattered, 100–120 mmm. diam.; spores yellowish
with a slightly greenish tinge, obovate, 7–9 x 5–6 mmm.” The American
Naturalist, =17=:1165. November, 1883.


                      10. Puccinia helianthi Schw.

                      On Helianthus divaricatus L.
                 Columbus, Ohio.      October 10, 1901.
                 Coll. W. A. Kellerman and F. J. Tyler.

“Puccinia helianthi Sz. P. minor orbicularis aggregata nigra, sporidiis
globoso-ovalibus bilocularibus longissime pedicellatis.

“In plurimus Helianthis vulgaris. Sporidia fusco-lutea, pedicello albo,
pellucido.” L. de Schweinitz, Synopsis Fungorum Carolinae Superioris
(excerpta), p. 47. No. 495. (1822).


                      11. Puccinia helianthi Schw.

                       On Helianthus mollis Lam.
           Sandusky, Erie Co., Ohio.      September 17, 1901.
                         Coll. W. A. Kellerman.

                         Supplement to No. 10.


                  12. Puccinia marie-wilsoni Clinton.

                            Aecidial stage.
                  Caeoma [Aecidium] claytoniatum Schw.
                       On Claytonia virginica L.
            Arlington, Hancock Co., Ohio.      May 1, 1901.
                         Coll. W. A. Kellerman.

“C. A. Claytoniatum, L. v. S. C. fere simplex et sine macula, occupans
tota folia. Pseudoperidiis latis sparsis. Sporidiis aurantiacis.” L. de
Schweinitz, Synopsis Fungorum in America Boreali media degentium, p.
294. No. 2892. (1834).


                     13. Puccinia podophylli Schw.

                            Aecidial stage.
                       Aecidium podophylli Schw.
                       On Podophyllum peltatum L.
           New Plymouth, Vinton Co., Ohio.      May 10, 1901.
                         Coll. W. A. Kellerman.

“Aecidium podophylli Sz. A. maximum orbiculare demum effusum
flavo-aureum crassissimum, sporidiis subelevatis bilocularibus.

“Folia et caules Podophylli saepe ingenti clade late longeque tegit,
colore pulchro oculos alliciens.” L. de Schweinitz, Synopsis Fungorum
Carolinae Superioris (excerpta), p. 40. No. 435. (1822).


                      14. Puccinia smilacis Schw.

                          Teleutospores only.
                         On Smilax glauca Walt.
         Mineral Springs, Adams Co., Ohio.      Oct. 30, 1900.
                         Coll. W. A. Kellerman.

“Puccinia smilacis Sz. P. major confluens difformis et stellata
nigro-fusca.

“In Smilace rotundifolia omnia folia subexsiccata occupat.” L. de
Schweinitz, Synopsis Fungorum Carolinae Superioris (excerpta), p. 46.
No. 494. (1822).


                    15. Septoria podophyllina Peck.

                       On Podophyllum peltatum L.
                   Columbus, Ohio.      June 9, 1901.
                         Coll. W. A. Kellerman.

“Septoria podophyllina. Spots large, indefinite, reddish-brown;
perithecia epiphyllous, few, clustered on or near the center of the
spot, pallid or blackish, slightly prominent, collapsing when dry;
spores filiform, variable in length, straight or slightly curved,
.0008–.0015 of an inch long.” Chas. H. Peck. Botanical Gazette, =4=:170.
June, 1879.


                   16. Ustilago zeae (Beckm.) Unger.

                         Lycoperdon zeae Beckm.
                             On Zea mays L.
                Columbus, Ohio.      September 30, 1901.
                         Coll. O. E. Jennings.

For full account of the synonomy with citations and notes, see J. C.
Arthur, Botanical Gazette, =23=:46, from which the following is taken:

To the translation by Johann Beckmann of Tillet’s account of the species
contained in the Royal Academy of Paris, 1776, where it is stated that,
“Son dernier effet consiste à convertir cette excroissance en une
poussière noirâtre et assez semblable à celle qui sort du lycoperdon ou
vesse de loupe.”—a foot note is added by the translator proposing the
binomial designation, as follows:

“Meiner Meynung nach, ist das hier beschriebene Gewaechs allerdings ein
Staubschwamm (Lycoperdon) und zwar eine Species parasitica, deren in
Lin. Syst. Nat. schon drey befindlich sind, unter welchen also dieser
Art, etwa unter dem Namen Lycoper. zeae ein Platz anzuweisen waere.” J.
B., Hannoverisches Magazin, =6=:1330.




                     HELPS IN ENTOMOLOGICAL STUDY.


Persons who are anxious to learn something of the habits of insects are
often at a loss to select reliable books. Some recent additions to the
list formerly available will make this task less difficult. The “Insect
Book,” by Dr. L. O. Howard, published by Doubleday, Page & Company,
covers the groups of insects, exclusive of the butterflies, moths and
beetles. It gives figures of a large number of species, some of them in
natural colors, and while some of the figures fail to give all the
detail necessary for the exact identification of species, most of them
are very satisfactory. The keys, descriptions, typical life histories
and directions for making collections, are written especially for the
class of students who do not have access to specific collections,
libraries or instruction.

Another book of great interest at the present time (also by Dr. Howard)
is entitled “Mosquitoes, How they Carry Disease, How they Live, How they
are Classified, How they May be Destroyed.” This deals in a remarkably
clear and attractive manner with the habits of mosquitoes, their
breeding grounds, the different species and their distribution, their
relation to malaria and yellow fever, and the measures by which their
numbers may be reduced. It furnishes incidentally a most excellent guide
to the methods of life history study for aquatic insects. It is
published by McClure, Phillips & Co.—H. O.




                        AN ABNORMAL SALAMANDER.

                       (Explanation of Figures.)

                           E. B. WILLIAMSON.


Mr. John Russi during the past summer collected a newt, Diemyctelus
viridescens, Raf., near Salem, Ohio, with a fifth foot growing from the
dorsal surface of the left thigh, as shown in figure 1. The newt is a
young one, 48 millimeters in length.

[Illustration: Newt]

The left femur is slightly longer than the right, and is shown much
enlarged at figure 2 in anterior view. Near its middle is a section of
cartilege which allows of the femur being bent slightly in any
direction. Tendons from the fifth foot pass to the femur at this point.
Figure 3 shows a much enlarged drawing of the skeletal elements of the
foot from dorsal view. The salamander was kept alive for some time but
so far as was seen made no use of and exercised no control over its
extra foot. I am indebted to Mr. Russi for the privilege of examining
this interesting specimen which he has donated to the Salem High School
Museum.




                     THE SUMMER’S WORK AT SANDUSKY.


The work at the Lake Laboratory at Sandusky the past summer was very
encouraging and indicates a steady growth in this branch of university
work. Aside from a number of instructors and students from the
Departments of Botany and Zoology and Entomology of the University,
there were in attendance representatives of a number of other Ohio
colleges and high schools. Courses in General Zoology, Botany,
Entomology, Invertebrate Morphology, Embryology and Ornithology were
given. Collecting trips to different portions of the bay, the lake
shore, and the country adjacent to the laboratory were productive of
many interesting objects for study, and reports on some of these will
appear in later numbers of the NATURALIST. Special excursions to
Castalia, Lakeside, Kelley’s Island, Put-in-Bay and Green Island were
not only enjoyable, but furnished much of profit in the way of
collections. One of the most appreciated feature was a visit to the U.
S. Fish Commission Hatchery at Put-in-Bay, which furnished an
opportunity to watch the plankton work done on the Shear Water under the
direction of Prof. H. B. Ward.

A series of Friday afternoon lectures on biological problems, with
titles, “Adaptation in Animal Life,” “Aquatic Life,” “Air-breathing
Animals,” “Some Phases of Evolution,” “Some Problems in Applied
Zoology,” “Mimicry and Protective Resemblance in Nature,” were given by
Prof. Osborn, and one on “Natural Selection,” by Prof. Landacre.




                   THE MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF PLANTS III.

                           JOHN H. SCHAFFNER.


During the past summer, the plants mentioned below were measured by the
writer in northern Kansas. A number of species grew far beyond the
height mentioned in our manuals, although there was a very severe
drought the entire summer. The height given probably approaches the
maximum in but few cases and a better growing season might produce a
very noticeable increase in size. The measurements are given in
comparison with those of Britton and Brown’s Flora.

                                              Britton. Measured.
        Polygonum lapathifolium L.               3 ft.     8 ft.
        Polygonum camporum Meisn.                    3        6¼
        Froelichia floridiana (Nutt.) Moq.           4         5
        Chenopodium album L.                        10       12½
        Anemone virginiana L. (Ohio)                 3        3½
        Polanisia trachysperma T. & G.              1½        2¾
        Cassia chamaecrista L.                      2½        5⅔
        Astragalus carolinianus L.                   4        5½
        Meibomia illinoensis (Gr.) Ktz.              4         7
        Euphorbia dentata Michx.                    1¼         4
        Euphorbia hexagona Nutt.                    1⅔         5
        Euphorbia nutans Lag.                        2        3¼
        Ceanothus ovatus Desf.                                 4
        Ammannia coccinea Rottb.                    1⅔         3
        Gaura parviflora Dougl.                      5        12
        Stenosiphon linifolium (Nutt.) Britt.        5         8
        Onosmodium molle Michx.                      2        2½
        Lycopus americanus Muhl.                     2         5
        Mentha canadensis L.                        2½         3
        Mimulus ringens L.                           3        3½
        Lacinaria punctata (Hook.) Ktz.             2½         3
        Helianthus giganteus L. (Ohio)              12        13
        Coreopsis tripteris L. (Ohio)                8         9
        Carduus altissimus L.                       10        11




                  THE BIRDS OF CEDAR POINT, SANDUSKY.

                              R. L. BAIRD.


The following list of birds I observed on Cedar Point within two miles
of its extremity, from July 30th to August 20th, 1901, while a student
at the O. S. U. Lake Laboratory. The list is not so complete as it might
be. I found the birds I did for the most part in short daily visits of
about an hour each, generally in the afternoon. One whole day I spent on
the Point and two half days. With one exception, that of the American
Herring Gull, I think all the species named nest in the neighborhood of
Cedar Point. The list ought to be much extended by going over the part
nearer the mainland. I think at least fifteen or twenty more species
ought to be found there as summer residents.

I rode from Oberlin to Sandusky several times and the additional species
I saw in Erie county I shall add in a list by themselves. The most
noticeable of these were the Bank Swallows. They were in immense flocks
along the road from Sandusky to Huron. Sometimes as many as five hundred
would alight on two lengths of telephone wire.

The Long-billed Marsh Wrens were quite common all the time in the reeds
to the west of the Point. They were not singing, however, after August
5th. The swamps upon the Point supplied many of the shore birds. In a
flock there were generally Bartramian, Pectoral, Spotted and
Semipalmated Sandpipers, Semipalmated Plover, and Killdeers. It was a
common thing during the last week to hear the Coots in the marsh west of
the Point. Pied-billed Grebes were also tolerably common there. The Bald
Eagles were probably a pair which had a nest nearer the mainland. The
American Bittern I quote on the authority of Mr. Field, of Dennison
College.

I use the order of the latest A. O. U. check-list. The following
abbreviations I add after each species: C.—common; Tc.—tolerably common;
Fe.—few; figures indicate the exact number seen.

                           CEDAR POINT LIST.

     6. Pied-billed Grebe, Podilymbus podiceps. Tc.

 51_a_. American Herring Gull, Larus argentatus smithsonianus. 1.

    70. Common Tern, Sterna hirundo. C.

    77. Black Tern, Hydrochelidon nigra surinamensis. Fe.

   190. American Bittern, Botaurus lentiginosus. Fe.

   191. Least Bittern, Ardetta exilis. Fe.

   194. Great Blue Heron, Ardea herodias. Tc.

   201. Green Heron, Ardea virescens. Tc.

   212. Virginia Rail, Rallus virginianus. Tc.

   214. Sora, Porzana carolina. Tc.

   221. American Coot, Fulica americana. Tc.

   228. American Woodcock, Philohela minor. Fe.

   239. Pectoral Sandpiper, Tringa maculata. Tc.

   246. Semipalmated Sandpiper, Ereunetes pusillus. Fe.

   248. Sanderling, Calidris arenaria. Tc.

   261. Bartramian Sandpiper, Bartramia longicauda. Tc.

   263. Spotted Sandpiper, Actitis macularia. C.

   273. Killdeer, Ægialitis vocifera. Fe.

   274. Semipalmated Plover, Ægialitis semipalmata. Tc.

   289. Bob-white, Colinus virginianus. Fe.

   316. Mourning Dove, Zenaidura macroura. Fe.

   331. Marsh Hawk, Circus hudsonius. Fe.

   333. Cooper’s Hawk, Accipiter cooperi. Fe.

   352. Bald Eagle. Haliætus leucocephalus. 2.

   364. American Osprey, Pandion haliaetus carolinensis. 1.

   387. Yellow-billed Cuckoo, Coccyzus americanus. Tc.

   388. Black-billed Cuckoo, Coccyzus erythrophthalmus. Tc.

   390. Belted Kingfisher, Ceryle alcyon. Tc.

   393. Hairy Woodpecker, Dryobates villosus. Fe.

 394_c_. Downy Woodpecker, Dryobates pubescens medianus. Fe.

   406. Red-headed Woodpecker, Melanerpes erythrocephalus. C.

 412_a_. Northern Flicker, Colaptes auratus luteus. Tc.

   423. Chimney Swift, Chætura pelagica. C.

   428. Ruby-throated Hummingbird, Trochilus colubris. Fe.

   444. Kingbird, Tyrannus tyrannus. C.

   452. Crested Flycatcher, Myiarchus crinitus. Fe.

   461. Wood Pewee, Contopus virens. C.

   465. Green-crested Flycatcher, Empidonax virescens. Fe.

   477. Blue Jay, Cyanocitta cristata. C.

   488. American Crow, Corvus americanus. Fe.

   494. Bobolink. Dolichonyx oryzivorus. Tc.

   495. Cowbird, Molothrus ater. Fe.

   498. Red-winged Blackbird, Agelaius phœniceus. C.

   506. Orchard Oriole, Icterus spurius. 1.

   507. Baltimore Oriole, Icterus galbula. Tc.

 511_b_. Bronzed Grackle, Quiscalus quiscula æneus. C.

   529. American Goldfinch, Astragalinus tristis. Tc.

   563. Field Sparrow, Spizella pusilla. Fe.

   581. Song Sparrow, Melospiza melodia. Tc.

   587. Towhee, Pipilo erythrophthalmus. Fe.

   593. Cardinal, Cardinalis cardinalis. Fe.

   598. Indigo Bunting, Cyanospiza cyanea. C.

   608. Scarlet Tanager, Piranga erythromelas. Fe.

   611. Purple Martin, Progne subis. C.

   613. Barn Swallow, Hirundo erythrogaster. C.

   616. Bank Swallow, Clivicola riparia. C.

   619. Cedar Waxwing, Ampelis cedrorum. C.

   624. Red-eyed Vireo, Vireo olivaceous. C.

   627. Warbling Vireo, Vireo gilvus. Tc.

   636. Black and White Warbler, Mniotilta varia. Fe.

   652. Yellow Warbler, Dendroica æstiva. C.

   681. Maryland Yellow throat, Geothlypis trichas. Tc.

   683. Yellow-breasted Chat, Icteria virens. Fe.

   687. American Redstart, Setophaga ruticilla. Fe.

   704. Catbird, Galeoscoptes carolinensis. Tc.

   705. Brown Thrasher, Harporhynchus rufus. Tc.

   718. Carolina Wren, Thryothorus ludovicianus. Fe.

   725. Long-billed Marsh Wren, Cistothorus palustris. Tc.

   727. White-breasted Nuthatch, Sitta carolinensis. Fe.

   731. Tufted Titmouse, Parus bicolor. Fe.

   735. Chickadee, Parus atricapillus. Fe.

   755. Wood Thrush, Hylocichla mustelina. Fe.

   756. Wilson’s Thrush, Hylocichla fuscescens. Fe.

   761. American Robin, Merula migratoria. Fe.

   766. Bluebird, Sialia sialis. Fe.

                      ADDITIONAL ERIE COUNTY LIST.

   360. American Sparrow Hawk, Falco sparverius. Fe.

   373. Screech Owl, Megascops asio. Fe.

   501. Meadowlark, Sturnella magna. Fe.

   540. Vesper Sparrow, Poocætes gramineus. Tc.

   546. Grasshopper Sparrow, Ammodramus savannarum passerinus. Fe.

   560. Chipping Sparrow, Spizella socialis. Tc.

   617. Rough-winged Swallow, Stelgidopteryx serripennis. Tc.

   622. Loggerhead Shrike, Lanius ludovicianus. Fe.

   721. House Wren, Troglodytes aedon. Tc.

                                                          Oberlin, Ohio.




                    MEETING OF THE BIOLOGICAL CLUB.


The Biological Club met in the Zoological lecture room on the evening of
October 7th, at seven o’clock. Professor Osborn presided over the
meeting.

The minutes of the June meeting were read and approved. The evening was
given to reports on personal work and observations of the summer.

Professor Prosser reported that he had spent part of the summer in
northern Ohio. He visited points along the Cuyahoga and Rocky rivers,
and studied the outcrops of the conglomerate at Boston Ledges, Little
Mountain, Thompson Ledges, Nelson Ledges and at Sharon in Pennsylvania.

Professor Kellerman collected a quantity of material in the Gauley
Mountains of West Virginia, adding a number of plants to the published
list of that state and securing a few that appear to be new to science.
He also collected several hybrid oaks in Ohio, and some specimens of
Cratægus, which Dr. Sargent of the Arnold Arboretum pronounces new
species. A number of species have been added to the published state list
of Ohio.

Professor Mills gave a report of the opening of a prehistoric mound in
Ross County just outside the town of Chillicothe. A number of skeletons
and some very valuable material were obtained for the collections of the
Ohio Archæological and Historical Society.

Professor Schaffner spent the summer in Kansas. He talked interestingly
of a visit he made to the Pottawattamie Indian Reservation, and showed a
series of photographs procured during a short stay among these
interesting people. Scientific investigations were made on several
subjects, among which the following may be mentioned: “The Self-pruning
of Trees;” “The Distribution of Cacti and Ferns in Kansas;” “The Maximum
Height of Plants;” and “The Timber Conditions of Kansas.”

Professor Landacre gave observations on the cocoon-spinning and
egg-laying of the common garden spider.

Mr. Morse mentioned procuring a water snake with thirty-three young.
Also that the blowing viper, Heterodon platyrhinus, has some peculiar
habits while in confinement. One specimen if teased would go through a
series of contortions and eventually come to rest lying on its back. If
all was quiet then it would soon take up its normal attitude, but if
touched, or someone made a noise it was likely to turn over on its back
again.

Professor Cook spoke regarding the advance of plants in rock-quarries.
Monocotyls and willows are mostly brought in by water, while dicotyls
are more often brought in by wind. The monocotyls are the first to
appear as a usual thing. In the particular quarry in mind sycamores and
willows were the only trees observed.

Mr. Bridwell spent the summer in Kansas, where most of his time was
spent in collecting plants and insects. The dry weather appeared to have
its effect, as collecting was not as good as it had been in former
years.

Professor Osborn showed several photographs of tracks made by various
animals on the sand of the lake beach at Sandusky. Also other
photographs of scientific interest, among which may be mentioned the
fine glacial grooves of Kelly’s Island, and the nest of a red-bird
containing three young.

A proposition to hold the meetings of the club in Orton Hall for the
coming year was accepted.

The November meeting is the annual meeting, at which new officers are
elected, therefore a committee on nominations was appointed. Professors
Schaffner, Prosser and Landacre were appointed by the chair.

                                             JAMES S. HINE, _Secretary_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        _Ohio State University._


  Six Colleges well equipped and prepared to present the best methods in
    modern education. The advantages are offered to both sexes alike.

 The following list of departments will suggest the organization of the
                              institution:

  Agriculture, Agricultural Chemistry, American History and Political
  Science, Anatomy and Physiology, Architecture and Drawing, Astronomy,
  Botany, Chemistry, Civil Engineering, Clay Working and Ceramics,
  Domestic Science, Economics and Sociology, Education, Electrical
  Engineering, English Literature, European History, Geology, Germanic
  Languages and Literatures, Greek, Horticulture and Forestry,
  Industrial Arts, Latin, Law, Mathematics, Mechanical Engineering,
  Metallurgy and Mineralogy, Military Science, Mine Engineering,
  Pharmacy, Philosophy, Physical Education, Physics, Rhetoric and
  English Language, Romance Languages, Veterinary Medicine and Zoology
  and Entomology.

 Catalogues will be sent upon application. After examining the catalogue
             write for specific information to the President

                                     Dr. W. O. THOMPSON, Columbus, Ohio.


                         SPECIMENS DESIRED FOR

[Sidenote: BOTANICAL
           MUSEUM.]

The large mushrooms, Puffballs and other Fungi; Abnormal growths and
interesting specimens of shrubs and trees. Also herbarium specimens of
Algae, Fungi, Mosses and Ferns as well as flowering plants. Address

                                Prof. W. A. KELLERMAN,
                            Department of Botany, Ohio State University,
                                        Columbus, Ohio.

[Sidenote: GEOLOGICAL
           MUSEUM.]

Will exchange Hudson, Corniferous and Carboniferous fossils. Address

                               Prof. J. A. BOWNOCKER, Curator,
                               Geological Museum, Ohio State University,
                               Columbus, Ohio,

[Sidenote: ZOOLOGICAL
           MUSEUM.]

Birds, Insects, Reptiles, etc. We wish to make our collections
representative for the fauna of the state and will greatly appreciate
all contributions to that end.

                          Address, Prof. HERBERT OSBORN,
                              Department Zoology and Entomology,
                                  Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.

  Ohio State University, Lake Laboratory. Located at Sandusky on Lake
    Erie. Open to Investigators June 15 to September 15. Laboratory
    courses of six and eight weeks beginning June 30, 1902. Write for
    special circular.


                         _Bucher Engraving Co._

                  Process and Wood Engraving,
                  Electrotypers and Manufacturers of
                  Stereotyping and Engraving
                  Machinery.

            _80½ North High Street_,      _COLUMBUS, OHIO._


     Lepidoptera Price List No. 3.—Price 5 cents Refunded to Buyers

                      Issued November 15th, 1901.

 Dealers in all kinds of ... ENTOMOLOGICAL SUPPLIES.

  Manufacturers of the Original and Celebrated ... SCHMITT INSECT BOXES.

                  _Builders of INSECT CABINETS, Etc._

                     American Entomological Company
                  1040 DE KALB AVENUE, BROOKLYN, N. Y.


[Illustration: Logo]

[Illustration: Logo]

                              NEW EDITION

                   WEBSTER’S INTERNATIONAL DICTIONARY

                         New Plates Throughout.

                        25,000 ADDITIONAL WORDS

                        Phrases and Definitions

Prepared under the direct supervision of W. T. HARRIS, Ph.D., LL.D.,
United States Commissioner of Education, assisted by a large corps of
competent specialists and editors.

             Rich Bindings. 2364 Pages. 5000 Illustrations.

☞ _The International was first issued in 1890, succeeding the
“Unabridged.” The New Edition of the International was issued in Oct.,
1900. Get latest and best._


[Illustration: Logo]

[Illustration: Logo]

Also =Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary= with Glossary of Scottish Words
and Phrases.

            “First class in quality, second class in size.”
                        NICHOLAS MURRAY BUTLER.


        Specimen pages, etc., of both books sent on application.
                =G. & C. Merriam Co. Springfield, Mass.=


                        SYSTEMATIC COLLECTION OF

                     _Minerals_, _Rocks_, _Fossils_

              Birds and Mammals, Shells and Echinoderms.
              Also Human Skeletons, and Anatomical Models.

    Relief Models by Messrs. Shaler, Davis and Harris, illustrating

                   Physical Geology and Physiography


                          WRITE FOR CIRCULARS,

                 Wards’ Natural Science Establishment,

                            ROCHESTER, N. Y.


                  If you have your PHOTOS made at the

                          BAKER’S ART GALLERY,

                       You will ALWAYS be pleased
                State and High Sts.,    COLUMBUS, OHIO.

               OUR LIST OF AWARDS FOR THE LAST YEAR ARE:

 The Gold Medal at Paris Exposition.
         Highest Award at the Pan-American Exposition.
                 Six First Premiums out of seven at Ohio State
                    Exposition.


          DIE STAMPING.      PLATE AND LETTER PRESS PRINTING.

                            _SPAHR & GLENN,
                       PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS._

              50 EAST BROAD STREET.       COLUMBUS, OHIO.




                        _Scientific Taxidermy._


_EVERY SCHOOL_ should have a collection of Natural History specimens.
Why not

                          _START A COLLECTION_

[Illustration: Bird]

of the _=Birds=_ or _=Mammals=_ of your county or state, or enrich a
present collection by the addition of some well mounted specimens? Costs
so much? Perhaps so, but WRITE TO ME FOR PRICES and you will be
surprised how little such a collection will cost after all. Think of the
interest that will be awakened in your school in the

                           _STUDY OF NATURE_

to reward you for trouble and outlay.

I mount to order

[Illustration: Bird]

                  _BIRDS, MAMMALS, FISH and REPTILES_

and solicit your patronage. If you are interested, you should not lose
an opportunity to examine the novel collection of Ohio birds, prepared
by myself, in the museum of Zoology, Ohio State University.

_TAUGHT BY MAIL._—I give instructions in the Art of Taxidermy,
personally, or BY MAIL. You can learn to collect and prepare your own
birds, thus reducing the cost of a collection to a minimum.

For prices and circulars, address

                 NATURALIST—THOMAS M. EARL—TAXIDERMIST
           Cor. Naghten and Ninth Sts.,      COLUMBUS, OHIO.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected obvious typographical errors and variations in
      spelling.
 2. Retained archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 4. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.
 5. Denoted superscripts by a caret before a single superscript
      character.


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OHIO NATURALIST, VOL. II, NO.
1, NOVEMBER, 1901 ***



Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.


Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK


To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.



1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.


1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:


  
    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  


1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.


1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:


    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    


1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.


1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.


1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.


1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.


Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.


The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.


The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.


While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.


International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.


Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.


Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.


This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

